As you can imagine, the cost of building a nuclear
power plant and a coal-fired plant is extremely
high on the front end. So the city is having to float
bonds to pay for this high cost at the front end. I
think with the knowledge that as you move on out
into the future, those costs are going to be very,
very low. And what we're talking about in the
future is fuel costs. So the utility rates are
high. There's no question about it. I don't have
the detail about that, but I think we're in a good
position energy-wise to take care of our
problems. As a matter of fact, we are selling
excess energy to Houston to the tune of about $16
million a year through 1985. That helps to write
off some of that initial high cost. Water. Our
primary water source is the Colorado River, but
when you get projects like Stacy Dam being
approved upstream in the San Angelo area, we can
see demands on the water becoming severe. We've
got about 3 trillion acre feet of water above us, so
we've got plenty of water. But there are going to be
drawdowns on that upstream There are going to be
demands, continued demands downstream on that
Colorado River water as far as the rice farmers and
others downstream from us.
We will probably look to the Edwards Aquifer as a
water resource in the future, as a secondary. Now,
you see, the Edwards Aquifer here is not the same as
the one San Antonio has. There's a tip in it from
Buda on in. Austin, it tips in our direction. When
you get north of the city, Edwards picks up and
doesn't come into the Colorado, but tips toward
Round Rock and Georgetown. But Round Rock, I mean,
water is something that we need to look at on down
the line. We're looking at a 2,000 population here
of three-quarters of a million people in the
metropolitan area. What is it right now, Dan, to
your question? Well, the city is 350, and Travis
County is four and a quarter. So we're talking
about another 300,000 people in the county by the
turn of the century. Where do you think most of
those will locate? Well, they'll locate
generally north, south, northwest, and
southwest. But not much to the east. Not much to the
east. And the problems are soils, geology,
floodplains are very wide and very shallow. We had
one subdivision come in of 1,500 acres of 800 acres
was in a floodplain, for example, kind of thing. So
most of it is going to be in the area that's easiest
to develop, has the best access, provides the most
opportunity for moderate cost housing. It's not
going to be east or west. Water is going to be
something we need to think about. When you
consider that That increase in population moving
to transportation now. And 98% of a million person
trips a day are in cars. And consider continuing
that percentage to 2 million person trips, 3
million person trips. Yes. In spite of the cost of
gasoline. Yes. Individual travel by some mode is
going to continue. Let's just assume that we can
change the proportion from 98.2 to 90.10 90% of two
million person trips is a million eight. We've
still got 200,000 people riding in buses, but
we've got a million eight riding in some kind of a
vehicle. When you consider that three-fourths of
those trips are multipurpose trips and cannot be
taken care of easily by a transit system, I think
transportation is a very, very serious problem.
Now, how do we deal with it? We have been
encouraging employers to locate closer to
subdivision areas so that people don't have to
drive so far to work. We don't insist that they
locate in industrial parks. That's the reason the
planned development area site plan and
industrial performance standards have been
developed, so that if we get an industry to locate,
that it does not negatively impact residential
development around it. We actively encourage the
Chamber. to do that. We've actively been
encouraging the Chamber to work with Chambers and
other small communities within 25 miles,
Georgetown, Taylor, Seguin, Round Rock, San
Marcos, Bastrop, with their Chambers of
Commerce, maybe to encourage some industry to
locate there, to build up their economic base.
It's important that the region be a strongly
economic strength, but not so much Austin has to
have all that economic strength. We're not so sure
that the CBD should be active. We are thinking that
it may not be a good idea to actively support
increased development in the CBD.
Okay? Spread it around. What's happening to
Congress Avenue? Congress Avenue is in the hands
of a task force at this moment. to come up with some
alternatives to beautification as well as
handling traffic on the street. The mandate of the
council is that the street may be continued six
lanes with 45-degree parking, two-way. But in
those plans, we have sidewalk extensions at all
the intersections and tree planting. and program
and signage program that takes care of some of the
aesthetics and pedestrian comforts as one walks
the avenue. And we're building that to see and to
make sure that if the council ever wants to move to a
phase two project, which may take parking to 30
degrees and reduce lanes, that we can simply
expand the sidewalk out to make greater room for
pedestrians. to make sure that what we do in phase
one doesn't prohibit us from moving into a second
phase at some future time. What about the creek
over here? What's its name? Waller Creek. Waller
Creek? Yes. Could you describe that project? Yes.
Waller Creek beautification is proceeding.
There is some between $1 million and $2 million of
CIP money set aside for hike and bike projects.
walkways, pedestrian amenities, landscaping,
bridge crossings. That's being done by a
consulting firm? The plan was done by a consulting
firm. Which firm was it? It was a firm out of Dallas.
Dahlberg? Yeah. Myron Dahlberg. And the Parks and
Recreation Department is now implementing the
program. It will include at some time a flood
bypass through the center part of the city And what
will occur then along the creek is much like
something like San Antonio, except not quite as
significant. There will be some structures
placed in the creek to provide for ponding rather
than stormwater. And that will be from about 10th
Street down to about 3rd Street, the flood bypass,
so that in that business area, one can build a
business and back it up to the creek and then open it
up to the creek and things like that. Very good. But
the first phase is primarily hike and bike trail
from the university area, capital area, down to
the lake. And then it'll join the existing hike and
bike trail. At the lake, right. Very good. That's
it. All right. Thank you very much, Dick. You're
welcome. This is going to make a primary
contribution toward the volume, I'm sure. Well, I
appreciate the opportunity that you give me to
talk to you about it. And call me, Bob, whenever, if
something comes up, questions that you need
answered maybe that we didn't cover or something
that you want to cover that wasn't on the list. Just
give me a call. Thank you very much. Okay.
This is January 9, 1981. We're at the residence of
Professor Kevin Stowers of St. Edward's
University. And we're going to pick up from our
conversation yesterday. Today, it will be
oriented toward the city of Austin rather than
Galveston. So Kevin,
there are some questions that probably don't
apply as directly in the case of Austin and your
views of it because you're not an agency director
here as you were in Galveston. But if you'd like to
just go through those and comment as you feel
comfortable doing so, that would be a great job.
Well, let me begin by first by saying that I would
feel more comfortable in the case of Austin taking
a broader view of the overall sense of
development, because I'm sure there are a lot of
details and ins and outs and, in many cases,
personalities that I am not as familiar with as I
would be in, say, other communities where I've
directly worked. And many of these documents and
dates we've already documented. And I'm sure that
you've documented many of those. I think Austin is
interesting as a community in a planning sense
because It's been at the game for a very long time
for this part of the country. I'm sure you know that
the first major comprehensive plan in the
community was adopted, Modern Plan, in 1928,
which places it really in the forefront of modern
planning efforts. And at the same time, the city of
Austin has spent, on a per capita basis, a
relatively large amount of money on recreational
development, planning efforts, engineering,
public works, and so forth. I think it shows in
comparison to many other cities. And the quality
of what we have reflects that. So from that reason,
I'm particularly interested in what I would call
kind of the transitional phase when Austin really
began to grow in the 1960s and 70s. And some of the
things that I see happening in the future is the
general growth in the Sun Belt has blossomed with a
lot of migration into the Sun Belt in Austin and
certainly the other parts of the South. So going
that direction, although I would like to say that
historically, Austin was a planned community
also. It was planned. It was laid out on a grid
system. The capital, interestingly enough, was
located precisely so that its steps were at the
base of the 100-year flood plain of the Colorado
River. So this capital was not located in the
center of the community, as you might
traditionally expect. But with waterborne
transportation, you find that a lot of the retail
and warehousing development, commercial
development, occurred between the capital and
the river itself, where the risk of the periodic
flood was certainly worth the technological
difficulties of moving commodities and goods
from the river to the warehouses to be sold to
consumers. And so you can see a historical
development there that's continued through this
time. And the street system largely is dependent
very much on the physiography and terrain. It
reflects how Austin related to areas outside of
the region, other cities, communities, its
transportation system. And a lot of what we see
happening today continues on that historical
tradition that was laid down when Austin was laid
out. As I mentioned, the Capitol is located as a
very valuable and central piece of property up out
of the floodplain. It was interesting that the
first state prison was located right down on the
river, right next to it, where if there was a good
flood, it would certainly save the taxpayers a
little money in the next fiscal year. which is kind
of an interesting philosophy. But I think that you
can begin to see how people in that period treated
physical development and land uses. The south
side of the town, which is perhaps the one I'm most
interested in because of some interns I've been
working with and neighborhood associations, as
well as just the fact that it seems to be where
things are beginning to happen in a big way, as well
as St. Edward's being located in the south side. It
was very late in developing historically. Part of
it is simply the barriers to transportation
formed by the river. And I don't know if you've had a
chance to examine the 1928 plan. Not yet. Dick
Lilly has copies of all of them in the library. OK. I
was going to say, also, if they did not maintain
copies, the Austin-Travis County collection at
the public library downtown, right next to the
brand new library. The old library maintains a
complete collection of all municipal documents,
memorandums, minutes of meetings. So in the case
of Austin, we have a very good historical record as
opposed to Galveston and perhaps many other
communities. So that is a resource that would
certainly be worth you know, exploring and
pursuing. And there are reprints available of
some of these maps and aerial views and
perspectives of the city through different
periods of time beginning in the 1830s moving
forward to the modern period. And I think that kind
of illustration is helpful. Very interesting to
include. And so that would certainly be one thing
that I would be looking for forward to including.
Kevin, I asked Dick Lilly. In summary, a question
that I'd like to ask you. Could you take a look at
Austin as a whole and at this point in time, which
seems to be somewhat critical in terms of Austin's
development, enumerate maybe very few principle
problems that face Austin from a planning point of
view? What opportunities do you see, perhaps, on
the horizon for Austin?
Well,
I guess I've been kind of optimistic, or I've just
been looking at things happening, because I
haven't really named problems in the way I've been
looking at Austin and thinking about it.
Certainly, I think Austin, unlike a lot of
communities in Texas and perhaps across the
United States, is in the position of having
opportunities, and perhaps more opportunities
than they have problems, which is kind of an
encouraging difference from a lot of communities
I've worked with and been associated with. In
fact, there seem to be so many more strengths that
you're not in the situation of running around with
a fire bucket trying to put out emergencies. Now, I
think if you're on city staff in a city like Austin,
it seems like they're all emergencies, but in
reality, In many cases, it's opportunities. We
can talk about things that are happening in Austin
that have real planning significance by the
dozens. And I would include things like rapid
growth. You certainly have a very rapid growth in
population occurring in Austin. It's moving from
being one of the nice, small, medium, quite state
capitals with the state university located
therein to being a major city. If our population
projections are accurate, and they've been
pretty well right on up to this point, we would
expect to see conceivably the city of Austin being
the size of Dallas or larger by the year 2000, which
is mind-boggling right now. Indeed. Yes. Do you
think the infrastructure could handle that?
Well, that's one of the potential problems.
I'm not so quite as concerned about the
infrastructure in this case as I am about the
environment. Because if you begin looking at the
physical environmental limitations of Austin,
it's a remarkable site. And that's one of the
things that makes it attractive. You're in a
transition zone, really, between three major
plant community ecosystem groups. You're
transitioning from the rolling hill country,
basically cedar breaks, limestone hills,
aquifer recharge areas down into the Texas
coastal plain, heavy clay soils to the north, farm
communities. And you've got a tremendous
divergency. There's a tremendous number of
creeks. It's an extremely wet, viable,
complicated area. The terrain is hilly. It's
rolling. It breaks sharply. This particular
house is located virtually at the edge of the
Balcones Fault. You can go less than a mile or so to
the west, and suddenly you're into the hill
country. You go a couple of three miles to the east,
and you're suddenly on flat, heavy clay soils.
This makes a big difference in the way things have
got to happen if we're going to retain the kind of
environmental character that we care for. Now, we
don't have much of an air pollution problem in
Austin, and we probably won't. Do you think the
environmental character can be maintained with
that many people at it? Well, I think that's going
to be very difficult to do. I haven't sat down with a
pen and pencil and done any calculations. I think
that conceivably, just looking at the map in terms
of the areas that it would be possible to build in
without having some sort of environmental
trade-offs, that we can certainly probably
double the population without increasing
density. That's just mapping the area and saying,
okay, where are floodplains or recharge areas,
areas which show soil limitations for
construction, steep slopes, the traditional
things. So, yeah, we can grow a lot. The only
question, of course, is where, in fact, are we
going to be growing? That's one problem. The
infrastructure to support that growth gets a
little bit complex because it seems like, for
various reasons, We are not growing really the
directions that would be most environmentally
acceptable. And we don't seem to be really north
and south, and what has been determined to be the
growth corridor. And
could you stop the tape? Excuse me. As I was saying,
which would be really north and south, Also, the
real temptation and desirable areas from those
who can afford to buy houses today is to move into
the hill country. It's very attractive,
beautiful views, nice area to live in. Certainly,
that's where anybody with class and taste wants to
live. And they would like to look at the
unblemished hillside across from them. But of
course, people want to buy on that unblemished
hillside across from them. And then they're upset
when they look out and see their neighbor's roofs
and backyards and patios and so forth. All of this
compounds into tremendous erosion and runoff
problems. The cost of servicing the area is very
high from a lift station standpoint, road
maintenance. The number of lots that you can get in
with any degree of efficiency is very limited. So
you're talking about a lower density consuming
much larger amounts of land and probably with
fairly great trade-offs going East, which is a
flat area, you wind up with some... He's a friendly
cat.
I'll try to stroke you.
So anyway, you go east, you wind up with some
trade-offs in terms of having a major Air Force
base over there with rather loud jets flying over
that just rattle your windows and drive you
absolutely crazy. You wind up with... rather
heavy clay soils, some shrink-swell problems
similar to College Station and Bryan. You wind up
with limitations in terms of the structures and
type of structures to build. You're getting into
prime agricultural soils. And again, there are
some trade-offs there that create problems. What
about transportation? With a doubling or a
tripling of the population, do you see anything in
store for that? Oh, I think just basically
catastrophe. I don't think that there's adequate
funding available, and I don't look for it to
become available any time in the near future to do
the kind of massive development activities,
either in terms of mass transit or highway funding
that would be necessary to sustain that level of
growth. I think transportation is probably going
to be one of the critical infrastructure factors
that will limit development in this and many other
cities in the United States. And the outcome, of
course, is that in a city like Austin, we
essentially have only one major corridor
north-south. That's IH 35, which is essentially
at capacity. It backs up in traffic jams for about
an hour and a half or so during rush hour, two hours
during rush hour, every day if you happen to be on
it. from 7 to 8 in the morning or from about 4 to 6
o'clock, particularly trying to get across the
Colorado River. Trying to cross the river going
north to south is a very difficult proposition. We
have a fairly large number of bridges, but there's
a lot of movement back and forth. And that exceeds
the capacity of those bridges during rush hour.
Now, certainly this isn't the level or magnitude
of problem that parts of Dallas or Houston is
facing. But on the other hand, there aren't many
places in the United States that have that level of
magnitude or level of problem. What Austin is
facing is the prospect of beginning to have that
level of problem. Mopac Expressway has been
built, at least in the north portion, but it
doesn't really alleviate anything. We have three
major roads in the city of Austin, 183, Ben White,
and IH 35, that have horrible accident rates. The
development pattern on 183 and Ben White has
stripped development of the worst type with no
control of access whatsoever, tremendous
turning movements, U-turns, a large number of
driveways per facility. And this just compounds
the problem. And there's no acceleration or
deacceleration lanes. There's a narrow
right-of-way. The land is extremely expensive.
And any attempt to alleviate the congestion
increasing the facility or its size is going to
wind up with some real difficulties real expenses
that are probably beyond the ability of the
highway department or the city to undertake are
the city's development standards adequate it
makes one me question whether they are or not if ben
white for example has as many problems i would say
that there's a real imbalance between city land
development standards, commercial development
standards, as they apply to street capacity and
street design in the city of Austin. I'm not sure if
it's a problem with the standards or some
historical things that have happened or a lack of
controls. I think there are some problems there.
And I haven't looked at it well enough to know what
the problem is. But allowing a 183 and a to happen,
And having those types of land use controls that
would permit that kind of traffic situation to
happen indicates some real problems. Now, I don't
know if the problems in the urban city
transportation department are in terms of the
inability to control zoning. Zoning is another
issue that's interesting in Austin, because
right now they're in the process, or they may have,
they're still in the process of trying to adopt a
new zoning ordinance. I don't know if that's been
mentioned to you or not. Yes, it has.
Glover, who is actually doing the design of the
ordinance now, we're in the same class at
Berkeley. Yeah, very good. There might be hope.
Yes, he's very good, very pleasant guy. I think
that that's part of the problem, and I think the
city recognizes the land use controls have got
problems. They don't like to come out and say those
things too directly. It doesn't do them much good
politically or otherwise to say that they've got a
real catastrophe on their hands. But the
ordinance is an old one. It was apparently adopted
many decades ago. I think about 54. Yeah. I was
going to say 48 or 54, somewhere in there. And it was
copied from the standard ordinances that were
being written in the 30s and 40s. Exactly. And in
the 20s. And in the 20s, for that matter. And it just
compounded a lot of problems. There's a lot of land
that's mis-zoned for all practical purposes.
causes a lot of turmoil. It doesn't tend to
stabilize neighborhoods. You see a lot of
neighborhoods in change and fluctuation simply
because the land is somewhat inappropriately
zoned. It's terribly complex when you start
changing a zoning ordinance in a comprehensive
way to get the thing passed because there are so
many people that have so much to lose. So I
sympathize with that.
Mopac, if it is finished, and it will be, and
extended across the river. To Ravenswood, is it?
Well, past Barton Square. I can't remember where
it ends now. But when it's extended across the
river, it's going to do some things. And it's
interesting that we're talking about this,
because about three months ago, I had a student
that was working for one of the neighborhood
associations ask me what seemed to be the most
dramatic kinds of things that affected
development in South Austin. And I pointed to what
I thought were two decisions that were made really
back in the early 60s, and in some cases actually
going back 30 and 40 years, although certain
people don't like you to know that those decisions
were made 30 and 40 years ago, that tremendously
impacted South Austin. One was the cleaning up of
Town Lake, changing it from a sewer to a fairly
decent linear park system. which, you know, I
don't argue with, but at the same time, that
changed the character and the type of investment
that's going to be attracted to it. Suddenly,
instead of it being small shops and stores and
neighborhood service facilities, you're
beginning to look at some people that might be
interested in building major hotels or
convention centers. And sure enough, that's
exactly what's happening once the population
mass and the activities level got to a point that
suddenly people were interested in that kind of
investment. No one's mentioned this before.
Well, once it's there and the population enlarges
to a certain critical point, And you've got a
beautiful park facility, a water relationship.
And it's close into downtown, into governmental
centers. And you're within, really, 10 minutes of
the Capitol. And in reality, you're not that far
from the University of Texas. Of course, that's
very logical. And you look at it, it's old, junky
facilities that are run down. And you've got, in
many cases, people that acquired the land and put
it together because they thought possibly
something was going to happen. And sure enough,
you wind up with convention type hotels going in.
And this wipes out several blocks of relatively
moderate income housing and lower scale
commercial development. This wrecks all kinds of
havoc on the ensuing neighborhoods down to Ben
White because it kind of has a rippling effect. And
another thing that is impacting was the decision
to build Mopac as an expressway, a west loop. The
decision was first kind of pinned out by some
anonymous bureaucrat in the highway department
40 years ago, if I can believe what I've been told.
He kind of looks at it and says, well, let's see what
this looks like. And of course, from an
engineering standpoint, it was not an
unreasonable decision. You follow the railroad
grade. Railroad engineers weren't stupid. They
followed the easy way in and out of places. And it
kind of made some sense. And you didn't catch
anybody's house that was too important. But
unfortunately, it was close enough for Smilin,
Ralph Yarborough, and a few other illustrious
accolades of Texas politics to hear the noise. And
there's been no end to the complaints ever since.
And it became a political issue. And of course,
people sometimes use these things advance their
own interests, particularly if they're very
powerful or influential politicians.
Interestingly enough, the sound barrier that
they put up on Mopac is totally ineffective. All it
did was create a psychological feeling, a visible
manifestation that the government agency was
responsive and that the sound has been listened.
Actually, the sound levels, if you measure them,
are well within Normally acceptable levels, as
established by the EPA, are any other group that
you want to utilize. There is no sound pollution
problem on Mopac in terms of residential
adjoining land uses. However, it was a nice
political issue. It created a lot of neighborhood
backlash, and there were certain outs that wished
they were in politically.